Hey, there.
All right, so I've got another set of scenarios for you now, and these ones should be pretty easy
to grasp.
They're actually somewhat related to some previous capabilities that we've learned in this module.
So I want to present you with a few scenarios again.
Let's say the Maiya the scroll through our list of people here, our list of employees.
Let's say that we just want to know programmatically if all of these programmers have a salary greater
than, let's say, $3000, OK?
And we want to figure this out using the Streams API.
Now, let me throw a caveat or two in here.
I think we already know how to do this.
Just maybe like using a filter or something where we'll say, you know, iterate through the list and
filter out everybody who is or filter filter through every employee who is earning a salary greater
than three thousand bucks, right?
Then we decide what to do with those employees who who get to pass through the filter, right?
So we could just list them out.
Later on, we'll learn some additional streams, API methods that we could use, where we could count
them something like that.
But if we literally just want to get a Boolean value to answer the question of whether or not all of
the employees have a salary greater than 3000, we haven't learned how to do exactly that.
So let's take a look.
It's pretty easy.
All right.
So here's our list, right?
And we're going to just continue to use this, this this bit here, but we can get rid of some of it.
Let's see here.
What do we not need, I think.
Well, actually, I think all we really care about is, at most the employees that are coming out of
the stream of employees.
So I think all the rest of these lines are not needed for this.
All right.
So if we want to simply find out a yes or no, if all of the employees have a salary greater than three
thousand, what we can do is make use of a method in the Streams API, which is called all match.
So the all match method takes a predicate just like a filter.
Would we use it pretty much exactly the same as a filter.
OK, all match.
And it's asking the question Do all of the objects in this stream match the predicate that we are supplying
to it?
So let's say that we've got an employee and we're going to just use the lambda expression to implement
this predicate.
Right?
So we could say something as simple as where he died.
Get salary is greater than 3000.
All right.
Now here's a couple of things to note.
This method all match is a terminal operation.
We've seen a few other terminal operations, such as the for each method in the Streams API, which
means that it will be the last thing that you can do in a pipeline using the Streams API.
And what it does is it returns a Boolean right because we're asking a Boolean question Do all of the
items in this stream match the predicate or satisfy the predicate that we are supplying here?
Yes or no?
So that returns a Boolean.
So that means that we need to probably like capture the output of this and we can do that by just,
you know, closing this off with the semicolon, putting our cursor at the end here and then doing an
option command.
And now we can name this variable that we are about to create this Boolean variable
all over three three K
and then we can print that out.
And so let's run it and see what we get.
All right, so it returns a false.
Not everybody is getting a salary over over 3000.
Now let's lower this to $1.
And run that again.
Still getting a false.
You want to take a quick stab at why, by the way, it has nothing to do with the programming, I guess
doesn't really have anything to do with the programming.
OK?
Did you figure it out?
OK, so the problem, if you want to call it a problem, is our data set.
Remember this guy he keeps, he keeps, you know, he keeps causing this trouble.
This this guy.
So he results in the creation of a dummy employee and a dummy employee has no salary.
It's a salary of zero.
Right.
And so that's what's going on here.
So if we want this to work otherwise, probably what would be nice is just to filter out this guy,
which we've done before.
And look at that, we've already got our ready made predicate that knows how to filter out those, those
those dummy you guys, right?
So maybe what we do is we just slip a filter right above that.
And we will reference our employee predicate, which we should really rename now to something more more
appropriate, let's say dummy selector.
OK.
And then we want to negate this because with this approach that we have right now, it would actually
permit only the dummy.
And we want to get rid of the dummy, right.
We want to negate this so we can do that with our predicate variable here by just doing a period negate,
right, so we can flip the logic of that.
So now we're saying filter out the dummies, right?
OK, so let's run this again.
There we go.
And now we're getting a true.
And now I think we can go back to our our previous value.
What did we have?
3000.
All right.
Let's try that.
Now we're getting a false.
So I happen to know this is legitimate.
Not all of these employees are actually earning 3000 bucks.
So I think they are all earning at least 2500, though let's try 2500.
OK, very good.
So yes, they are all earning over 2500 bucks.
All right.
So that's what the all match method does.
It just returns a Boolean so that we can check in this case, every item that is coming through the
stream after we've done any filtering, right?
OK, now there's more methods and we're going to take a look at these as well.
So that's the all match.
Now what if we wanted to know the answer to the question?
Do any of the employees have a salary of whatever, right?
Maybe we'll make it some a higher number of fifty thousand right?
Can you guess what that's going to look like?
I think you should be able to.
All right.
So yeah, we can just change the all match to any match.
And if you notice right here that returns a Boolean as well, and it also takes a predicate so pretty
straightforward will change this number, though from 2500 to 50000.
Let's try that.
Honestly, I don't even remember myself what these values are, but I'm pretty sure we had some millionaires
sitting there, right?
So let's run this and see do any match.
Yes, they do.
OK, let's play a little bit here and see.
Let's I don't know.
Let's let's do ten million ten hundred thousand one million ten million.
All right.
So let's see if we've got any 10 millionaires.
Let's run that.
Oh, yes, we sure do.
All right.
So I'm not going to keep going through this.
We already have the guessing game, right?
And now this is turning into a a poor man's guessing game, but you get the idea.
Now, some of you may be wondering, Yeah, I mean, this looks all well and good.
What's the advantage like?
Why?
Why do why do these methods exist versus just using a filter or whatever?
And you know, I guess it's a fair question.
So obviously, one of the reasons might just be for convenience of the sort of the situation.
Maybe you have a circumstance where you really just need to know yes or no, right?
And you don't even want to have to count up the number of of objects that passed through all the filters
and things and then convert that into a yes or no, you just want a direct yes or no.
The other reason, though, is because some of these methods that we're looking at now provide us with
with what is called short circuiting.
And we have looked a little bit at this.
Previously we learned about methods like drop while and take while do you remember those?
Those methods will basically iterate through the stream, either until a predicate is satisfied and
then they will stop traversing the stream at that point and either just return the rest of it, or they
will return everything up until that point, depending on which of those methods you, you use.
The point is that they're able to kind of like short circuit, some part of the stream, OK, and the
benefit of that, as I stated when we were learning those methods, was that let's say you have a stream
with potentially millions of items in it and you don't want to have to iterate through every single
one of them.
Or rather, you don't want your program to have to do so right because it's unnecessary if you're just
looking for the first match or something of that sort.
Then some of these short circuiting type methods frequently will make.
Much more sense and be much more efficient for the computer.
OK, so there's an any match and that's, you know, pretty straightforward as well.
There's also a none match.
So for that, we can let's see here.
We'll do none.
Now this is asking the question, do none of the items match or satisfy the predicate?
OK.
So for this, let's just say like there shouldn't be any matches of of employees whose salary is less
than zero.
Right?
There shouldn't be any employees with a salary less than zero.
So let's just do zero and then we'll switch that that way.
Right?
All right.
Let's try that.
So we get we get a true so that's telling us, yes, you are correct.
There are no employees with a salary less than zero.
OK.
And again, this will short circuit if while it's going through the list, it finds one employee who
does have a salary less than zero, then it's going to just stop right there and return a false right.
And again, that's that short circuiting functionality.
All right.
And a couple more methods that I want to show you.
There's a find first and a find any.
So the find first.
Let's take a quick look at that.
The way that this one works is a little bit different.
It does not take a predicate.
In fact, it doesn't take anything at all.
So instead, we'll just call find first.
Now it doesn't take any input, but it does return something and it returns something that we haven't
played with yet.
This method returns something called an optional.
Now I'm going to try not to go too deep into options right this moment, but I am going to give you
a little bit of an understanding.
OK, so so first, let's let's go ahead and change what we're capturing here so that we can make this
happy.
All right.
So it's going to return an optional and so I'll put my cursor here after the find first semicolon there
and I'm going to let's capture this with the option Command V. And I don't know.
Let's call this optional EMP, right?
Optional employee.
Now, look at what the data type for this optional employee variable is.
It's optional and then a generic of employee.
Right?
So what what options are?
They are a data type that was introduced into Java version eight, and they allow us to avoid having
null values for variables.
OK, and perhaps even more importantly, if used properly, they can allow us to avoid null pointer
exceptions.
So real quick context here.
Let me comment that for a second.
Remember a few lessons ago when I was talking about this predicate right here, and I was saying that
typically when we are testing for string equality against a constant, it is usually recommended that
you actually flip this expression around a bit and you would prefer to say something like in slash oops,
a dot equals and then you do all of this this way.
Right.
And then we can get rid of all of that.
And the reason I said that this is usually recommended is because if the value that we have here is
capable of being null, meaning it has not been explicitly set to something right, it's just nothing
if it's null.
With this approach, we're safe.
It just won't be equal, right?
It'll just say not equal, it'll return a false.
But with the other approach, which I will go back to with this approach, if this guy is null, then
there is no object.
And if there is no object in this case, the string string object.
And if there is no string object, then there is no way to call the equals method of an object that
does not exist, right?
You can't call a method on an object that isn't there, right?
So that would result in what is called a null pointer exception.
And I've touched on exceptions a tiny bit every now and then where I say that's basically like an error.
Your it's your program blowing up, that's really what it is.
You really don't want that quick side note for those of you who are old enough to have used windows.
I'm not a Windows user anymore.
I'm not a regular Windows user anymore, so I don't even know if this is still a thing.
But back in the 90s, and probably, I don't know, 20 years as well.
Windows when it would crash, you would get what was called the infamous blue screen of death.
Right?
So the, you know, the entire operating system would just blow up and you would have to restart the
computer.
Well, null pointer exceptions in a Java program are kind of the equivalent of that.
You don't want them to happen.
If your program experiences a null pointer exception, your program is done and it will have to be restarted.
So we don't want those to happen in our code, in our programs.
And so it behooves us to write code that won't result in null pointer exceptions.
And so that is one of the biggest reasons why the recommendation of taking the string constant and putting
it in the front here exists.
Now, having said all of that, there are other techniques that can be utilized newer techniques, newer
in the Java world that can be utilized to help avoid null pointer exceptions.
And one of those techniques is to use what are called optional.
So what we can do is if we declared current well, currently, this get lastname method is a method
that returns a string, OK, and that string could possibly be null.
All right.
If we did not write any code inside of this class to prevent that string from ever being null, it could
possibly be null for some reason.
OK.
However, we could have.
I was about to make a I was about to accidentally say this so we could make an optional.
However, we could define this get lastname method and the underlying field for it as not a string,
but as an optional string.
And what that allows us to do is to say this string is optional.
It might have a value.
It might not have a value.
We'll find out at runtime.
But the key thing there is that it will always be optional, right?
So the optional.
So you can think of an optional as an actual object.
In fact, it is.
It is an object.
OK.
And fields that that support options should always at least have the optional object existing.
OK, so think of an optional as a box and think of that box as being capable of housing whatever the
optional generic type is.
So if it's an optional of a string as we have here, then you can actually imagine a in a box which
is an optional and inside of that box.
There might be an employee and there might not be an employee, OK?
Or if we had an optional of a string.
Think of a box and inside of that box there might be a string and there might not be a string.
OK, now this may sound like we're just kicking the can down the road, right?
Because, OK, now you've got this optional of a string.
We still need to open the box and see if there's a string.
And if there isn't the string, isn't the program still going to blow up?
No, not if we write our code correctly.
So the at any rate, let's let's come back here to the fine first.
So the fine first method tries to find the first item in the stream.
The problem is, though there may not be any items in the stream by the time we get here, right?
What if we had a filter, for example, that was filtering out everything, right?
So that by the time we got here, there's nothing, there's nothing left.
There are no other objects matching.
I'm not saying that's what we have here.
We know that's not our case here.
But I'm just saying like, what if it's easy enough to do so?
If there were no other items coming back here, then this fine first method still wants to return something.
And mainly, that's just because, to be honest with you, by the time this fine first method was added
to the Java Streams API, the creators of Java had already.
Created the optional class to deal with the issue of null pointer exceptions, and I think they couldn't
stomach doing any further API coding that would allow or contribute to further null pointer checking
and null pointer exceptions and all of the mess that exists around that type of coding any further.
And so they figured, you know what?
Here's a great opportunity for us to use our own contraption and make this method just return an optional
all the time.
And then it's up to you to determine whether or not there's something in that optional or not.
OK, so anyway, the fine first method is going to return an optional of an employee and then we can
do something with that optional to determine if really, truly there was an employee.
OK, so let's go ahead and do that.
In fact, let's let's do this and give you a little sneak preview into optional.
So if there is an employee coming out of here, let's grab their first name and print it.
OK, now I'll show you how we can do that.
So often there are actually several ways we can do it, but maybe I'll start off by showing you the
probably one of the better ways to do it, OK?
So optional employee.
So there may be an employee inside this box and there might not be.
We don't know.
So how can we safely get the optional employees first name?
If the optional employee actually exists, right without writing a bunch of stupid code?
So what we can do is refer to the optional employee dot.
And then now here's the cool thing the option class has a map method, just like the streams API has
a map method.
OK.
And so we can actually use this pretty much the same way you're used to seeing it now in the Streams
API, so I can reference employee
get first name just like that.
However, I'm not quite done because this is all well and good.
If there actually is an employee in that optional, what if there isn't one, though?
What's going to happen?
Well, this map method, if we hover over it, let's see what it actually returns.
The map method actually returns another optional.
Now it feels like we're about to get into the Twilight Zone, some kind of recursive, you know, camera
video camera, watching a TV, watching the camera, watching the TV or whatever, right?
One of these recursive situations.
But actually, it's not that bad.
What we can do now is we can just put a period here and then we can say, or else now this or else is
expecting us to supply it with a default string that we want to have returned if the employee does not
actually exist in this case.
And so we can say, I don't know, nobody.
Now we might want to make this look a little prettier.
Also, so because it's basically kind of like modeled off of the streams API, in fact.
So we could indent a couple of lines here kind of like that, right?
And kind of make it look like it's a little miniature, optional pipeline, if you will.
All right.
So what what this is actually saying is basically if there is an employee, then get the first name
out, otherwise just returned.
Nobody.
All right.
So let's run this and see what happens.
Hey, there we go.
So we got somebody.
It's Fred, right?
So now let's break it.
Let's break it and and see how it behaves if we don't get anybody out.
Right?
So let's change our filter to do something impossible, I suppose.
Uh, let's see.
Let's filter through all employees who have a salary less than zero.
Right?
We know there aren't any of those employees, right?
So now let's run this and see what we get.
We get nobody.
So you see what's going on here?
Do you see how much more convenient it is to code in this way?
So with more traditional programming, we might have had to say something like, you know, I don't
know, I'll just I'll just pseudo.
Coded here, so we'd have an employee, right, but we wouldn't know if there was actually anything
in it.
And then we have to say if and then we'd have to say something like if employee is not null, then.
Then whatever system died out, front line
employee died, get first name
else.
System got out print line.
No body.
Right, so something along those lines.
Not, you know, not hard to write, but I would say that
this approach, this approach is more concise, right?
It's this more concise and possibly more readable as well.
Now, maybe you're not crazy about embedding all of that inside of here and actually in real life.
I don't know that I'd be doing that either.
But then we always know that we could always this, grab all of that and then extract the variable out
of that with our option Command V and then past that guy in.
And so we know that that variable is always going to have something in it.
It's either going to have the word nobody or it's going to have the actual first name that we're looking
for.
All right.
And then finally, we can also use the Find Any, which is, from our perspective, very similar to
the Find first.
So that's also going to just find any object at all that satisfies our predicate and then capture that.
So you'll be wondering what's the difference between the find any in the find first?
Really, the difference has to do with how the streams API handles the ordering of the objects contained
within and how it can optimize to do what it does to to to flow through those streams to execute those
pipelines, depending on whether or not we actually care about the order or not.
Obviously, where they find any.
We don't care about the order.
This may have more of an impact, by the way, particularly if you are using the Streams API to do what
is called parallel processing, where we allow multiple processors or multiple cores within a computer
to execute our pipeline concurrently or at the same time.
Right.
So in that scenario, fine, if we're using find any, it doesn't matter which one we find that satisfies
the predicate even across multiple processes, right?
So if we've got a list of a billion employees and we write a pipeline using the Streams API to go find
any employee who matches our criteria, and we have 16 cores on a computer and we inform the Streams
API to make use of all of those cores or make use of parallelism and at least write.
Then generically speaking, you can imagine that those billion or so employees are going to kind of
get chopped up into groupings, and each core is going to get its own group of those billion or so employees
to process.
And they're kind of like looking for a needle in the haystack, right?
And whichever processor finds it first, Java will coordinate with the other processors to tell the
other ones, Hey, we found one so you guys can stop, right?
And it's not going to matter if it was the first one or not, if it was the first one in the original
list of one billion employees, right?
Because we told it to just find any.
All right.
So we're going to stop there with these nice, convenient methods, but we've got quite a few more methods
that we're going to run through in these streams API coming up.
So I'll see you in the next one.